- Distance approach: This approach represents the most intensively researched pairs trad- ing framework. In the formation period, various distance metrics are leveraged to identify comoving securities. In the trading period, simple nonparametric threshold rules are used to trigger trading signals. The key assets of this strategy are its simplicity and its transparency, allowing for large scale empirical applications. The main findings establish distance pairs trading as profitable across different markets, asset classes and time frames.
- Cointegration approach: Here, cointegration tests are applied to identify comoving secu- rities in a formation period. In the trading period, simple algorithms are used to generate trading signals; the majority of them based on GGR’s threshold rule. The key benefit of these strategies is the econometrically more reliable equilibrium relationship of identified pairs.
- Time series approach: In the time series approach, the formation period is generally ignored. All authors in this domain assume that a set of comoving securities has been estab- lished by prior analyses. Instead, they focus on the trading period and how optimized trading signals can be generated by different methods of time series analysis, i.e., by modeling the spread as a mean-reverting process.
- Stochastic control approach: As in the time series approach, the formation period is ignored. This stream of literature aims at identifying the optimal portfolio holdings in the legs of a pairs trade compared to other available assets. Stochastic control theory is used to determine value and optimal policy functions for this portfolio problem.
- Other approaches: This bucket contains further pairs trading frameworks with only a limited set of supporting literature and limited relation to previously mentioned approaches. Included in this category are the machine learning and combined forecasts approach, the copula approach, and the Principal Components Analysis (PCA) approach.